---
layout: post
feature-img: "assets/img/agnes-martin-3.jpg"
title: "39:  Abuse of the State Secrets Privilege "
date: 28-09-2010
---
Mr. President,

As a candidate, you vociferously opposed the abuse of the ‘state secrets’ defense by the Bush administration. When you were elected president, you asked your attorney general to initiate an investigation and develop guidelines to ensure that this blunt legal instrument was invoked only when national security would truly be imperiled by the release of sensitive evidence. It appeared that you understood the damage done to our democracy when government lawbreaking was shielded from investigation. These hopes have been dashed by the recent embrace of the doctrine by the Justice Department and White House counsel. Unfortunately, your administration has continued to invoke the state secrets privilege in cases where there are no secrets, only evidence of criminal behavior.

Early September, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals dismissed the case of Mohamed et al. v. Jeppesen DataPlan in a controversial 6-5 ruling. The court agreed with the government’s claim that letting the case move forward would imperil national security by exposing state secrets. The case involved the illegal ‘extraordinary rendition’ policy of the Bush administration, the plaintiffs having been kidnapped and handed over to foreign governments to be tortured, often on the basis of almost no evidence. Jeppesen DataPlan was a private contractor that operated flights for the CIA, the flights that took these plaintiffs to their torturers. The plaintiffs sued, but before Jeppesen DataPlan could respond to the lawsuit, the government stepped in and sought to invoke the state secrets privilege and dismiss the case. While a lower court found this argument to apply only to specific pieces of evidence, the recent decision from the court’s full panel applies to the entire lawsuit. As a result, your administration can now get almost any case it pleases thrown out of court just by claiming the state secrets privilege, even when the case involves possible criminal activity by the executive branch.

In fact, the state secrets defense seems to be invoked only to protect embarrassing government actions and shield executive lawbreaking. There is a total absence of any proof that national secrets would be divulged, as the details of the extraordinary rendition programs at the heart of Mohamed et al. v. Jeppesen DataPlan have been publicly known for years. To whom is this a secret? Certainly not the plaintiffs, victims of kidnapping and torture; nor the government, who implemented the illegal program. This case makes clear that the ‘secret’ is to be kept from the American people, the public at large. The court’s decision to accept the state secrets argument and deny justice reinforces the perception set by the earlier dismissal of Maher Arar’s case on the same grounds: American courts are closed to victims of official torture.

Just earlier this year there had been reason to hope otherwise. The case of al-Haramain v. Obama is another in which the government invoked the state secrets privilege in an attempt to shield lawbreaking, but one where the argument was not accepted. The plaintiffs were subjected to illegal warrantless wiretapping during the Bush administration, in violation of the FISA statutes, and sued for damages. The defense was so emphatic that the state secrets privilege required the entire case to be dismissed that it refused to argue the case on its merits. When Bush left the presidency, your administration continued to invoke national security and refuse to acknowledge the victims’ legal standing. Fortunately, District Court Judge Vaughn Walker rejected the state secrets argument, and in March 2010 decided in favor of the plaintiffs. The judge wisely noted that the state secrets privilege couldn’t be invoked just to hide criminal activity, writing that “…unfettered executive branch discretion [has the] obvious potential for governmental abuse and overreaching.” This decision was a resounding victory for transparency, accountability, and civil liberties. The only problem is that your administration has refused to cooperate with the court’s ruling, using stall tactics to withhold damages and continuing to deny the authority of the judge to rule on this issue.

In light of the Mohamed v. Jeppesen DataPlan decision, it appears that your administration thinks it can appeal al-Haramain v. Obama and get the full 9th Circuit Court of Appeals to dismiss. The use of the argument is already spreading. On Saturday the Justice Department again invoked the state secrets privilege, this time regarding a government power far more dangerous than warrantless wiretapping or even extraordinary rendition and torture: assassination of American citizens without trial. Al-Aulaki v. Obama is a case brought by the father of Anwar al-Aulaki, an extremist preacher and American citizen. Your administration has claimed the authority to assassinate al-Aulaki at any time, without trial, without showing evidence against him, and without providing any legal justification for your actions. Now, when these policies are challenged, government lawyers call this extrajudicial execution order a ‘state secret’ that cannot even be discussed. This is an extremely radical assertion of executive authority, broader than any powers claimed by the Bush administration.

Assassination without due process, extraordinary rendition and warrantless wiretapping are not state secrets, they are crimes of the highest magnitude. Uncovering the details of these cases and dispensing justice will not endanger national security; on the contrary, the abuse of the state secrets privilege does serious damage to our moral foundation as a country based on the rule of law. These odious attempts to brush illegal activity under the rug may be politically expedient and make life in the White House a little easier, but they drag our nation further down into the morass. Transparency, due process, and equal justice must not be sacrificed on the altar of national security. The Justice Department should drop the state secrets privilege in these cases and accept full public inquiries into alleged executive lawbreaking.

Sincerely,

Andrew Montes

9/28/10
 


 
 